In Praise of the Domestic Deity I bow to the guru, the tutelary deities, and the assembly of ḍākinīs. Regarding the praise of the domestic deity, also known as the inner deity, one attaches to the pillar of the inner part of the home the white and red drops and all kinds of new, good-quality resin decorated with colored wool. In front of that, one makes a fire out of all kinds of nectar-containing wood and sprinkles into it all sorts of offering substances, such as ground flour, boiled milk, and grains. To start, there is the cleansing ritual. Having recited over clean water either the long or short version of the dhāraṇīs of the wrathful Vajravidāraṇa or Bhurkuṃkūṭa and so on, one sprinkles with the white tail of a shugu and then recites: Hey! From the four directions-east, south, west, and north- The water of the white tiger, the blue dragon, the red bird, and the brown tortoise Has been blessed as wisdom nectar. Thereby, it ritually cleanses the deity of the inner section. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the personal deities. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the paternal deities. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the warrior deities. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the domestic deities. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the deity of the hearth. May the impure stains become clean! It ritually cleanses the deities above and the nāgas below And the nyen spirits in between. May the impure stains become clean! Just as the gods cleansed the Buddha Right after he was born, In the same way, I now cleanse With pure, divine water. OṂ SARVATATHĀGATA ABHIṢEKATE SAMAYA ŚRIYE HŪṂ Alternatively, recite whichever cleansing mantras you know, such as those of Vajravidāraṇa or Bhurkuṃkūṭa. After this comes the main part. RAṂ YAṂ KHAṂ On an expansive bejeweled vessel that arises From the syllable BHRŪṂ, which appears from an empty state, Having been blessed by the six syllables, A smoke offering becomes a gift of sensory enjoyments. OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ HA HO HRĪḤ Hey! In this divine house full of auspiciousness and virtue Has been lit a clean and pure fire Containing different kinds of nectar-containing wood. Precious food and drink, grains, and medicine have been sprinkled into it. By means of this smoke offering-an ocean of sensory enjoyments- Blessed by meditative concentration and mantra, All those that have become guests at the offering ceremony Have mended their samaya and confessed their transgressions. To the guests who honor the Three Jewels, I make this offering of nectar-containing smoke. I respectfully praise and bow to them. Please bless this divine house! To the guests, the glorious protectors with good qualities, I make this offering of nectar-containing smoke. I respectfully praise and bow to them. Please support this divine house! To the guests, the obstructing spirits who are karma's creditors, I offer the sensory enjoyments through this nectar-containing smoke. Please avoid harming this divine house And create peace and auspicious goodness For the compassionate guests, the six families! I augment the feast of the nectar-containing smoke. Bring forth joy to this divine house And produce benefit, well-being, and supreme bodhicitta! Hey! O owner of this divine house, Who is called the domestic deity Geltung, Whose body is radiantly golden in color, Whose turquoise jewelry jingles, Whose silken clothing flutters, Who holds a pillar made of shell in his hand, Please come here today out of joy And partake in the nectar-containing smoke offering! I respectfully praise and bow to you! O owner and sponsors, Please protect this divine house! Do not let the golden pillar collapse! Do not let the turquoise beams break! Protect this residence from fire's harm! O sponsors, please be a friend to this place. Be on guard all day long And be on watch all night; Fulfill wishes accordingly, And prevent disrupting conditions. Please protect it as if it were your dearest child. Please create peace and auspiciousness. Hey! Furthermore, to the deities and the nāgas, To the sadak, gyal, and tsen spirits, and the mamos and so on Ever-present in and attached to this divine house itself, And to all of the genyen mountain deities and the assembly of yamas, I offer nectar-containing juniper smoke. I dedicate to them an ocean full of the qualities of the sensory pleasures. May their wishes be fulfilled and their aspirations be achieved! Please put an end to sudden obstacles! With a peaceful and helpful mind And without being aggressive or jealous, Please be a close friend to this sponsor. Do not forget to be a guard and a night watch. Please create peace and auspiciousness. Hey! High praise to the precious Jewels! High praise to the qualities of the glorious protectors! High praise to the fierce domestic deity! High praise to the personal deities! High praise to all those who do good! Praise to the deities and protectors high above! You will expel the obstacle-creating spirits and malicious ghosts down below! All the white deities and protectors Shine bright light, like the sun and moon! They are majestic and great, like a mountain! They are gloriously assembled, like jewels! Their voices are loud, like the turquoise dragon's! They inspire joy in everyone's minds. May the sponsors have a long life without illnesses, And may there be auspiciousness so that all goals be achieved! Hey! May the gurus give their blessings! May the tutelary deities grant spiritual attainments! May the Dharma protectors bring about enlightened activity! May the fierce domestic deity always protect us! May the personal deities and the nāgas increase well-being! May they be victorious in combat against the dark-colored, obstacle-causing spirits! May they raise the banners of the white-colored and virtuous! Even the evil spirits will be loving, like to their own children. Life, power, and merit will be increased. Fortune, luck, and material wealth will gather like clouds. Days will be auspicious and nights will be auspicious; All night and all day there will be well-being. May there be auspiciousness and happiness in abundance! Ki so! Fortune! May the gods be victorious! SVĀSTI SVĀSTI BHRŪṂ BHRŪṂ SVĀHĀ The owners of the house call upon the deities and scatter the different kinds of grains. The tantric practitioner spreads flowers and utters whatever auspicious words they know. Then follows a feast, and auspicious and happy divine dances and so on should be performed. Maṅgalam. 
